okay how are you guys doing
did you have a good Thanksgiving break
yes
are you ready for the last week of
classes yeah okay hard to believe with
this last week but actually next week I
will give a bonus lecture I will give a
I'll give a review lecture on Tuesday
next week and also I remind you that
there is a lot of materials for for the
final exam which are available on these
spaces and also on the class homepage
which I hope by now you know how to find
all right and now we go back to to the
study of Stokes theorem so we've been
slowly laying the foundations in extra
foundations for for the Stokes theorem
and finally it's time to sort also sort
of to reap the benefits of all of that
so finally today we'll be able to to to
stage the result and to see what it
means and what the applications of this
result are okay and but first of all I
would like to to revisit the material
which we talked about last week okay
a week ago we talked about we talked
about surface integrals integrals over
the surfaces okay and the point was that
actually we studied two types of
integrals
two types of integrals over general
surfaces in the three-dimensional space
as a the good working example of such a
surface we'll look at the upper
hemisphere it's a surface with a
boundary which is a circle so you can
actually you can think that there is a
it's actually a part of a sphere which
is centered at the origin so you could
also imagine that there is a coordinate
system here X Y Z and and so the surface
what I'm talking about is the sir is
this upper hemisphere the surface of the
upper part of the surface of this here
okay which has a boundary which is a
circle so what we are trying to
understand is how to integrate over such
surfaces sorts of this type and relate
integrals over such surfaces to
integrals over their boundaries that's
the that is the point of Stokes theorem
okay so let's denote this by M and M
stands for membrane because I explained
last time that integrals over surfaces
of the second type can be viewed as as
the fluxes over of fluid through
membrane but here I will recall that
there are two types of such integral
that we have looked at the first type
the first type used you pick a function
and then you integrate over them this
function with a measure which we denote
by D s we talked about the
interpretation of this this has to do
with the surface area and more generally
with the mass so this represent the mass
of of the surface think of the surfaces
in a little aluminum foil say as f is
the mass density function density
function and when you integrate the
density function you get the total mass
it can also be a charge density function
and you would be integrating total
charge that's the first type the
important thing here is you integrate a
function and the second type is when you
start with a vector field so it's not a
function it's much more than a function
actually we represent it by people of
functions it has components P Q and R
right where each of this three is a
function of its own on its own right in
this case we also have double integral
which we discussed last time and that's
what's called a flux of a flux of a
vector field or a surface integral of a
vector field which we do not like this a
dot GS against okay so this is the
called sometimes called the flux of e
through through this membrane and it
represents the rate of flow of a fluid
through through a membrane M if F is is
the velocity vector field for this fluid
I explained last time and now of course
even even if you were not here you can
actually watch the lectures on multiple
places
which is a good I think it's a good
resource okay so it makes me it makes it
easier for me to just say I did it last
time so on if it was not recorded that
would be not would be a little unfair
but now I know that you if you don't
remember you can always go back and
watch it again alright now what how to
how to compute this so the key to
computing this is to as well as the
other one is to parameterize the surface
right so parameterize it which means
that we write X as X of some UV and y at
some Y of UV and Z is that some function
V of UV where u and V are in a belong to
certain domain now on the plane
parameterize it well when I say
parameterize it I mean triumph I am
and so when you parameterize it you
actually get a very explicit formula for
for this for this integral as just a
double integral over D so we get an
integral which is now in the realm of
the previous chapter of this course
something which we studied before okay
now the key to this is the full leg that
the way we introduce the way we
introduce this integral we actually
wrote it as an interval of the first
type we wrote it as an integral the
first type over m where what we do is we
take a dot product between E and n where
n is is the unit normal vector field to
this to the surface when we do that when
we take the dot product we convert our
vector field into a function this
becomes a function
and that function we can now integrate
in the sense of the integral the first
type so this is how we introduced it
today I will explain a different way to
think about this where you don't have to
to use the concept of the first I will
integral the first time to understand
the interval the second time but this
actually this brings brings up the
question as to what this n is I'm going
to say in this normal vector so in my
picture let me let me draw this picture
again in my picture this vector field n
would look like this
at each point of the surface we would
have a vector which is which kind of
sticks out and which is normal or normal
means perpendicular perpendicular to the
surface if you have if you have a
surface and you have a point on a
surface you can talk about the tangent
plane right we talked about this tangent
lines we even know equations for tangent
point how to find equations for tangent
plane and so we also have the notion of
the normal line a normal line is is
perpendicular to the tangent plane right
so at each point you have a tangent
plane I'm not going to draw this just
not to mess up the picture I want to
make it too heavy but there is a tangent
plane here right and also but it is also
a normal line so it's perpendicular to
the tangent plane when something is
perpendicular to the tangent line at the
point we might as well say it's
perpendicular to the surface right what
else can it mean to be perpendicular to
the surface it just means being
perpendicular to the tangent plane now
on this line there are many vectors you
can take if you have one vector on this
line you can take any multiple of this
vector so what we'd like to do is we'd
like to specify a normal vector at each
point and we want to specify it in with
as little ambiguity as possible so the
way to get rid of the ambiguity get rid
of the redundancy is to normalize the
vector to make it a unit vector if you
have any vector
certain magnitude and let you know if
it's nonzero you can divide by the
magnitude and you get a vector of length
one or magnitude one such a vector is
called unit vector so out of all the
vectors along this normal line we can
say let's take an or a unit vector the
problem is that when you do that you
still have a small ambiguity it is a
much smaller ambiguity instead of
instantly many vectors you end up with
two there are two possibilities there is
this one but there is also one which
goes in the opposite direction right so
it's kind of a mirror image of this one
and just by saying it's a unit vector we
can't kill this redundancy both of these
are bonafide unit normal vector to the
surface if you think about you know
about this upper hemisphere one of them
sticks out goes outside and the other
one goes inside right so so there are
these two choices at each point at each
point there are two choices and what
we'd like to do is we'd like to make a
choice at each point and along this
entire surface so that this choice is
continuous smooth in other words we
don't want to be in the situation where
we choose a unit vector at this point to
be going to go outside outwards and then
at the nearby point to make a go inside
right that wouldn't be smooth so when we
talk about a normal vector unit normal
vector field we mean that we want it to
vary in a smooth way so that's what this
n is and of this formula this n is the
unit normal vector field
and then I will emphasize wearing
smoothly smoothly along em such a vector
field is called orientation orientation
okay
I would like to contrast this to the
notion of orientation of a curve in the
case of a curve if you have a curve
going from point A to point B we talked
about each side in tation as a direction
along the curve okay and if the curve if
the curve has boundary points specifying
our intention is the same as specifying
which one is the initial point and which
one is the end point so here this would
be the initial point this would be the
end point if the curve does not have a
boundary for example circle we could say
it counterclockwise or its clockwise
right but let's let's look at at this
one which has which have end points it
has a boundary in this case by an by
analogy to this we observe that actually
in this case there are also two possible
orientations we can go this way or we
can go that way so there's a lot of
similarity with the notion of
orientation for curves and surfaces the
main difference is that orientation for
curve goes along the curve you kind of
flow you go with the flow such speed and
here you also go with the flow but the
point is that the flow goes across the
surface usually right we don't want to
flow
you can't flow along the surface and
from Senate I suppose you can some maybe
but it makes much more sense to flow
across the surface prism as I explained
you could have a grab a pipe you know
and this would be a membrane which kind
of covers covers this pipe and you would
be measuring the amount of fluid which
passes through it so it's much more
natural to talk about orientation across
rather than along in the case of
surfaces and like curves who which be
going along mean means a lot more sense
now
so this is one this is one important
difference between orientations for
curves and surfaces there is a
similarity right there's a similarity
that in both cases that to have two
choices so here there are two choices
here there are two choices and in this
case there are also good choices one
indicated in white one indicate in red
and if you think about it once you
choose it at one point then basically
you there is no choice at nearby points
because you have to wear it smoothly so
you know it that nearby it will be like
this nearby will be like this like this
like this because you don't allow jumps
if you don't tell have jumped once you
know it at one point once you specified
at one point of your surface you know it
everywhere but but then the question is
can we actually define it everywhere in
a in a consistent way and this is here
we can get surprised because in the case
of a curve there is always there are
always two orientations for any curve
you can always choose two orientations
one goes this way one goes that way
right but in the case of surfaces there
it actually exists surfaces which which
have none which don't have any
orientation and and this is actually
kind of cool you must have heard about
know you strip right have you for button
on your strip yes okay so here is a
little little demonstration for you so
we need to close up so yeah sometimes I
delays that's why I'm saying it and I'm
waiting for few seconds okay so here is
the here is the surface I mean it's a
surface and I colored it in two ways so
there is white side on one side is white
and other side it's pink
okay so now what I'm going to do is I'm
going to make a surface I can make a
glue a surface out of it in different
ways so for example I can do glue it in
this way right so good in this way it's
like a cylinder it's like a little
cylinder not so I mean kind of very low
height and in this case if you look you
can see that actually it clearly has two
sides right clearly has two sides
there's an inner side and there's an
outer side one is red one is pink and
one is white so like when you talk about
orientation you can also think about in
terms of choosing the side of the
surface I was talking about vectors
sticking out but once you have a vector
sticking out you have you have the
notion of what's outside and what's
inside so let's think that lets say that
if it sticks out this way then that's
the outside of the surface and and if it
sticks out this way then that's it
that's that would be you know that will
this would be the outside and that would
be the inside so it's like you know if
you put your t-shirts on inside out it's
kind of stuff right so that's that's not
a clear notion inside or outside or
surface right so that's what we're
talking about annotation is the note is
saying which side we consider as inside
which one you consider is outside
because of course a priori it is not
clear you can choose you can make your
choice right and sometimes you can have
a t-shirt which actually looks even
better if you wear it inside them inside
it kind of looks cool right but imagine
you have it I have a shirt which only
has one a t-shirt which only has one
side right so that would be difficult to
wear now but actually you can create
such a lot mr. Li t-shirt but you can
create such a surface very easily by
taking this same strip and gluing the
ends in the output kind of by twisting
by by 180 degrees okay if you do that
you say okay so let's say that this is
the this is the out this is the outside
right but then you trace it if you trace
it the outside the trace if you trace it
and then suddenly becomes white and when
you make the full circle you come back
on the opposite side right so if this
was outside outside it should be the
notion that if we follow it you know on
my on my shirt if I follow it everywhere
it's going to be on the same side always
I will never be able to jump on the
other side one would hope anyway and
that's the way it's supposed to be right
but here you go
you make a full circle and you come back
on the opposite side so that means this
is outside but also this is outside
right so that means but then which one
is it so it means at this point is not
defined
there is known there is no global notion
there's no global notion of inside and
outside you see remain so in this case
we will say that the surface is not
orientable and this is really remarkable
phenomenon again in the case of curves
all curves are orientable it's just that
there is a redundancy there are two
possible or ambiguity there are two
possible integers you have to make a
choice for surfaces actually we don't
even have that luxury
there are many surfaces which are not
variable for which you cannot
consistently say which is inside which
is outside and that's that's example
okay in questions so in this case if the
surface is like this there is no no
there is no orientation there is no unit
vector that you can make which varies
smoothly and gives it a normal vector at
each point because you know if I were to
give such a vector let's say again here
the vector will be sticking out this way
but if I very smoothly I would be forced
to come out here on this side so so that
means it becomes ambiguous and like at
this point there is no if it is the real
thing it has to be simultaneously this
and that that's not allowed right so it
does not have a consistent orientation
so in a case of statutory this integral
is actually not well-defined
you cannot set up an integral vector
field over surface which is not
orientable which does not have this with
this type of orientation in other words
the consistent notion of inside and
outside so we have to be aware of this
now the good news is that most surfaces
are orientable more surfaces that are of
interest to us for example if we are
thinking about about really a fluid
flowing in the pipe and you're thinking
of something which is like a cover at
the end of the pipe it is going to be
orientable so it's not really good we're
not going to be too handicapped by the
fact that by the fact that for
non-orientable surfaces this is not what
define most of this all the surfaces we
will consider in this class for sure
will be orientable okay but we have to
be aware of the fact that actually it's
not we should not take this for granted
it actual
a surface that may not have a particular
even one orientation of course if it has
one it will have it will have to have
two right
the point is that if n is one of them
the negative end will also such an
object also such an orientation so it
can't be that you have just one
orientation
you either have none or you have exactly
two always and in all of the cases which
we will consider here our services will
have two orientations and this will give
us a little bit of a headache because
when we when I write now the Stokes
formula I will have to be very precise
in specifying how are that orientations
on the left and right hand side so as to
make make the equation correct okay so
let's go back to them let's go back to
this with this integral so the integral
is actually let's suppose that it is
re-enter ball so this is this is
important it's not it's not a given that
the surface is very interval but let us
assume from now on M is re-enter for
orientable that is that is to say M has
an impatient vector field patient vector
field and
and then it has necessarily two of them
as two orientations and a negative end
okay let's assume that and so pick one
pick one we'll pick one pick one
orientation which is what I call n in
this case we have this integral we have
this double integral let me give myself
more space like this so you have e dot d
s which can be defined by the formula
here I just I just rewrite it u dot n
yes now there are two choices so if you
take the second choice the second choice
means instead of n you take negative n
so if we choose negative n we just get
minus of what we had before what if we
take if you choose the other in tation
this will just result in overall sign so
in that sense you can say well it's not
such a huge ambiguity you don't get sort
of a totally different answer you get
something up to a side but you know it's
not it wouldn't be it wouldn't be
serious if we in the course we said all
our results will define up to a sign we
have to be precise we have to be able to
say is it you know 10 or negative 10
because sometimes you know your life
depends on it and no it's positive or
negative
so that's why that's why we we take this
seriously and we say the definition of
such an integral has to include variant
ation so if you do homework
it has to say the integral vector field
over the surface with respect to which
orientation and then there is standard
terminology certain terminology is you
can say orientation is upward upward
means that the the vertical component of
the vector field is positive so the
white orientation on that picture is
upward or it could be downward that
would be the red one and oftentimes if
we have a closed surface for example not
the entire sphere but saya but saline so
you know the upper Hemisphere but the
entire sphere you could say outward or
inward which also has a clear meaning
okay so let's pick one how do we
actually compute this we computed by
parameterizing M by choosing to exceed
the parameters U and V right and then
when we parameterize it so this integral
becomes we can write it very concretely
as follows it's e dot ru cross RV over G
where G is the parameterizing G is the
parametrizing so domain in on the plane
on the UV plane parameterizing domain in
the tooth on the plane or with
coordinates U and V what is R so R is
the vector which we get by combining the
three functions which parameterised our
curve x of u v i+ y of UV j plus z of UV
okay so these are the three functions
you put them together in two vectors in
the vector field r sub you simply means
that you take derivatives with respect
to you might be right vxd you
I plus and so on and likewise our sub e
means if you take V s GV I plus and so
on so once you have your permit ization
once you have your permit ization you
have this R and you have R sub u with by
taking simply partial derivatives of
these three functions with respect to u
and you have R sub V so then you can
just take the cross product and when you
take the cross product you get another
vector field which you can then dot with
your original vector field this will
give you a function which we then use an
integrate over the parameterization
domain and of course the point here is
that both there the original integral
and this integral are integrals over
surfaces but there is a huge difference
this surface is actually on the plane
it's flat so by this formula we express
a complicate integral over very
complicated surface which could be very
curved like a sphere or part of it here
as an integral over domain on the plane
which is flat so that's the definition
which we talked about last time and then
in some special cases where for example
your surface is a graph of a function we
have some the form of simplified and we
have various formulas which allow which
can give us a shortcut to the answer ok
so finally we are ready to state to
state the Stokes theorem
by using this notion of by using this
notion of a surface integral okay so let
me draw this let me draw this one more
time
so you have this our surface M and we
have the boundary the circle the circle
boundary which I'll call B of M so on
the right hand side of the Stokes
formula we will have a line integral of
a vector field over this boundary so
we'll have a vector field F which will
be defined in the three dimensional
space in particular will be defined on
this entire surface and on the
right-hand side would simply take the
line integral of this vector field over
the boundary okay so this is something
we learned before so I don't have to say
much about it this is just the what has
become by now the usual thing the line
integral of a vector field which is
again to calculate it we need to
parameterize the curve and and then
there is a very simple formula which
allows you to do to take this integral
and now on the left hand side we are
going to have an integral which is a
double integral and it's going to be an
integral over m okay and then the
integral it will be the integral of
another vector field and that vector
field will be nothing by the curl of F
Carolla
so you have your vector field and it
appears on the right-hand side but your
but on the left-hand side you have
another vector field this is something
which I was denoting by e in all my
previous formulas so you are we have
double integrals of of a vector field e
over surface but now take as e the curl
of your original vector field which is
given to you from the beginning
F F is given take its curl that's
another vector field and take the
integral of the curl and so the
remarkable statement is that that you
always have this equality you have this
equality or double integral and a single
integral over over surface and over the
boundary of the surface now what I have
said is still incomplete and the reason
it's incomplete is that both of this
integral depend on choice of orientation
did you have a question about this how
well Koral of F is would be would be
what I call here e right right so I I
purposefully called this vector field E
and I call that vector field F because
on the left hand side when we do the
double integral we are actually
integrating not air but curl F so that's
why I'm using a different notation here
so it's not to confuse you we are not we
have we are given the vector field F but
we are sticking that vector field on the
right hand side into a single integral
into a line integral right where it's on
left hand side we do curl and curl it
another vector field which we know how
to calculate and and today we'll
actually we'll actually see what the
meaning of that of that curl is kind of
a better mean it would get a better
explanation of what the meaning of this
vector field is okay so that's the
formula but as I said on both sides we
have two integrals which I explained as
I explained
requires the choice of orientation right
so in other words depending on how I
choose orientation on em I will either
get I will get plus minus some answer I
will get some answer or it's negative
and if I want to pin it down I have to
say which are in tation I should take
both integrals that well defined
there is no canonical choice of
orientation right there's no canonical
choice of orientation so there are two
possibilities and that two possible
answers they differ by a sign but I have
to say which one I should take for this
to make this well-defined likewise here
I also have two different answers in the
case of hand
I have this circle I can choose that in
station which goes you know counter
clockwise or clockwise if you look from
above so again there are two different
answers which differ by sign if I'm
saying that these two things are equal
to each other
I better be precise and say how the
orientations should be defined so as to
make this into an equality because if I
make the wrong choices instead of
getting this formula I'll get neg this
is equal to negative of that in other
words if I would be if I wanted to be
careless about orientation I would not
be able to state this formula at all I
would the best I could do
I will be able to say this is equal to
plus minus and then I and and if I did
that I should be fired so we don't want
this to happen well maybe you do but I
don't
so so that's why I'm going to explain
how to choose an intuition so that we
don't have this ambiguity and of course
the point is that it's you probably
guessed already because this is very
similar to the way to the problem which
already arose when we talked about the
greens theorem which is actually kind of
a little brother of this Stokes theorem
we'll talk about in a minute in Green's
theorem the results of this issue of a
variant ation and the way we handle that
was by saying that was the follow with
the following
let me do it here so you see in Green's
theorem we also have a two dimensional
region but it was flat this is flat this
is not flat well I have drawn it on a
flat black board but 3d you know I I was
just reading about this new movie avatar
you know it's going to be in 3d so I was
thinking I was thinking you know maybe
some years from now these lectures like
kato's will be given also in 3d so you
will all be wearing this cool glasses
and and you will actually see this
3-dimensional so I will be able to draw
three-dimensional surfaces I should talk
to Cameron about this I'm sure he's a
huge fan of multivariable calculus so or
if he isn't he should be because he uses
a lot of special effects and of course
how can you do special effects if you
don't use calculus anyway so in Green's
theorem you have a region like this and
the way we handle this as we said once
you have this region there in tation you
define on the boundary it's such that
when you walk on the boundary the region
is to your left okay if you walk on the
boundary the region is to your left so
it would be like this it would be
counterclockwise in this picture so I
would like to say the same I would like
to say that if I walk on this boundary
if somebody walks on this boundary then
the region should be a long variant
ation expect orientation the relation
should be such that as somebody walks
along this boundary the region itself
the surface is to the left but the
question is how do you expect that
person to walk on this there are two
possibilities right it could be that
they walk like this or they could be
walking from the other side of the
blackboard you see a priori there is no
choice I mean there are two choices a
priori right there there is no
there is no canonical choice there is no
given choice in the case of a plane
we do have an obvious we do have an
obvious orientation we do have a special
orientation and the reason is the
following
because we we there is an orientation
which kind of sticks out towards us
another way to say it is that there is
an orientation which we call K we use
the draw
so we draw this coordinate system which
is I J and then there is a K which is
obtained by the core screw rule the
vegetations the right-hand rule whatever
you call it remember this picture this
is this was one of the my fondest
memories for this class the discovery of
this of this visual aids you know the
look how you show the normal so the
point is that this if you can't just say
since I can actually move this you can
already appreciate the problem in giving
it Aryan tation it could transition
could be like this or it could be like
this but the point is when we actually
draw something on a two-dimensional
plane we look at it from a certain
direction we have to be looking at it
from a certain direction we either are
on this side and we're looking on this
side or we are there and let me tell you
there's not a whole lot of space behind
that board so we we should be on this
side right once we are looking at it
from this side we can give it any
coordinate system any orientable
coordinate system in fact this is not
even canonical either but I can rotate
it and so on but whichever coordinate
system XY I choose the cross-product of
the I and J will be looking in this
direction will be sticking this way so
that's why when we are having a region
on the plane we actually have a
canonical orientation that's what we
call vector K K being the cross-product
of I and J in this order first X so this
is the unit vector in the X direction
this is the unit vector in the Y
direction we take the cross product in
this order right and so that's what
gives us
this Z the G axis or the unit vector
along the z axis so we are kind of lucky
in this in this case we don't have to
make a choice the choice is made by the
by the fact that we are actually
observing it in a certain way we are
looking at this at this blackboard in a
certain way but if we have now a surface
in the three-dimensional space for
example I could just put this blackboard
somewhere in the middle of this class
and some of you will be on one side and
some of you will be on the other side so
for some of you will be looking from one
direction some of them will be looking
to the opposite direction so some of you
will do one orientation for some of them
it would be natural to take the other in
tation you see so in general there is a
choice of orientation but once you make
that choice if you make it like this you
can say if a person walks so that their
head is you know points in the right
direction up then then the domain is on
the left then it actually makes sense so
somebody could be walking like this that
their head would be this way right and
so they will have the region on their
left so that would be that we get the
old rule if on the other hand I will
just say let's choose the other
orientation which goes in that direction
I would still have the notion of
somebody walking on along the boundary
but that person would be on this side
right and then it would still make sense
to say that the that the the region is
to their left which would then mean the
opposite direction if you well you have
to believe trust me that this is how it
works but you could you can just imagine
it if it was if it were made of glass
you will see it right so the rule in
general is like this if person is
walking along this pointing in the
direction of the orientation if this is
your orientation you are and you are
you're not upside down you have to be
you know we entered it in the right way
you had to be above your feet basically
with respect to this orientation I'll
try to I try to not to make too many
jokes about this but you're I'm sure you
can come you can and you can do them
yourself if you walk this way
you're the surface should be to your
left so this is how it works and if you
were if I chose a different orientation
which would be inward then I would have
to draw this little fellow pointing in
this direction and then it would have to
walk so that the region is untutored to
the left okay so that's the rule is that
clear okay so this is pretty clear so
that's the rule I choose if I choose
that that rule which it will give me a
consistent formula it will give me a
choice whatever choice I take here once
they make the choice of orientation and
I get an intuition on on the boundary as
well and it is for these two choices
that these two integrals will be equal
to each other so that's a statement of
Stokes theorem now the next thing I
would like to do as I would like to kind
of try to demystify this formula because
at the moment it looks it looks pretty
bizarre in a way because you have the
strange you have two different types of
integrals so one of them is of the
vector field that one is this curl okay
so I would like what I would like to do
and I'd like to explain how this formula
actually fits in the general principle
which I talked about earlier okay of
which we have now seen several examples
so I would like to convince you that
this formula is actually special case of
the general principle just like the
fundamental theorem of for line
integrals and the greens theorem so
that's the next thing that we are going
to do
so in order to explain this I would like
to actually give a slightly more precise
formula for for a surface integral and
so this is going to be a slightly long I
may and somewhat boring calculation
tedious calculation but bear with me
because at the end of the calculation I
hope that I will be able to demystify
this demystified this formula and you
will see that really it is part of a
pattern which is much more how should I
say much more convincing okay so the
first thing I'd like to do is I want to
go back to general surface integral like
this a general so here it doesn't have
to be the curl doesn't have to be the
curl it could be a some vector field and
I would like to write a slightly more
explicit formula for it assuming that I
have a permit ization so let me recall
it what I wrote on the on the top of the
top and that in the top right corner
there
I wrote that this is equal to the
integral over D the parameterizing
domain of e dot ru cross RV where are
you in RV you you have well the
beginnings of are you in RV you have on
that blackboard so now I want to
actually calculate our u cross RV for
you okay so I'm going to calculate what
our u cross RV is so this is just the
the use of cross product this is just
the use of cross product where I put DX
D u dy D u and DVD you in the first row
and I put GX DV
dy DV and the zdv
in the second row okay
I just open I just just write down what
it means so so let me just start with I
so this is going to be dy D u DV DV
minus Gy DV DZ g gu XS times i okay
maybe here plus so now J so I have to
look at this and I have to remember the
sign so it's going to be easy to you I'm
it's a little bit going to take a little
a little time so but you will like it
when I when it's over
trust me so it's worthwhile it's
worthwhile to to do this calculation gzd
DV DX D u J we have to do it once to
believe it and then after this a lot of
things become simpler plus finally I
have to do the K and the K is the HD u
gy DV minus DX DV divided you okay check
this okay
are you with me on this it's good
you can only if you if you agree then
you know you will not have a chance to
to you to the disagree with me later you
have this your last chance
okay so if we agree on this have you
ever seen this formula before you're
under oath so have you ever seen it form
of the floor what does it what is it
cold it's kind of special
come on it starts with a J the Jacobian
okay
it is the Jacobian for the coordinates y
and z with respect to U and V this is
the Jacobian for the coordinates V and X
so this picture U and V and this is the
Jacobian for x and y with respect to U
and V is that everybody agrees with that
so I actually can rewrite this in a
compact in a more compact way by using
the notation which will which we
introduced when we talked about
jacobians okay so this is a notation for
the Jacobian is V what you put a deal
like this and then you put Y and V over
del of XY y UV this is a notation method
notation for the Jacobian which we have
used extensively about a months ago so
okay so this is times I plus we have the
Jacobian korzy F over UV j plus the
Jacobian of XY UV and then you put K so
so that this is actually the explicit
formula for this cross product and this
cross product enters in the definition
ok so now let me actually take the dot
product so that I get the entire
expression
for this I have to also say what is e so
let's say that E with AI + VJ plus CK
and then what do I get I get e dot ru
cross RV which is my integrand in the
surface integral is a times D times mr.
Kotian okay so that's the formula here
is actually explicit formula for what
you should integrate when you take
double integral vector field in split
form which is written entirely in terms
of the components of your original
vector field and the Jacobian of the
coordinates change from UV to all
possible pairs of coordinates amongst
XYZ now how can you remember this
without it memorizing this formula it's
very easy so first of all you have ABC
right these are the components of the
original vector field and then you also
have x y and z z coordinates so that you
have to remember that the structure of
the formula that there are three terms
each term corresponds to one of the
three components of the vector field and
then you have to remember which Jacobian
to put you see that three different
jacobians but there is also a saddle
point which is in the Jacobian you also
have to remember in which order you put
the coordinates you may remember from
doing double integrals by using general
coordinate changes that if you switch
the coordinates the Jacobian gets a
minus sign right the quotient gets a
minus sign so here it's important that I
put widely over UV and not dy / UV right
so first thing you notice that first
that if you take a the variables which
get involved so a Chris pawns to X so to
get the variables involved
you have to cross the route so you have
a Y Z here then you have B with XZ and C
with XY so that the two coordinates
which you take which appear in front to
gather with the component of the vector
field are the remaining two components
right so a is the X component so the
coordinates which are relevant to this
form of the formula are Y and C and then
you have to ask yourself in which order
and the order should be L what my
institutions called a cyclic order which
means this is first this is second this
is third this is fourth and so on so it
kind of goes in a circle so for example
y&z have to appear in this order Y Z but
Z and X should be appear you are at Z
what's the next one the next one is the
first one it kind of it's a cyclic order
okay so it's like VX and then like XY
it's clear so XY Y Z DX and then you put
the remaining component of the vector
field so that's what the meaning of this
formula is okay so that's the first
thing we should agree on the double
integral can be written in this form
okay but now let's go back to Stokes
formula in Stokes formula there is an
additional complication as if this
formula was not complicated enough right
we actually have to take the surface
integral note of a vector field itself
but of which curl so G we have to do one
more you know cross-product right but
actually the funny thing is that one you
want to do that cross product and you
combine it with this stuff which you can
imagine is going to look horrible
right actually it will look better in
some sense in or it you'll get something
which will have a much more conceptual
explanation so let's do that let's do
that because
I promise that I will I promised that I
would explain it to you so let me let me
explain this bill so we're halfway there
what we need now is we need to take the
to apply this formula to the left-hand
side of Stokes theorem where we are just
doing it to the curl of the vector field
and not over to execute as before so if
E is curl of F then what are what does
it look like so we have to again do this
i J okay then we put D DX g dy DZ and
then we so cqr so what do we get we get
v r dy minus DQ g z times i plus DP DZ
minus d r DX plus d r DX minus DP DZ but
please please check that I did it
correctly you are because if I mess if I
mess up one term then it will not come
out right so
okay good good that's right and in fact
for good reason because this is the
expression in Green's theorem right so
we know that Vince theorem actually is a
special case of this when only this term
shows up let's write DQ DX and here dy
exactly good I think now is correct so
now I want to put this in here in other
words this will be my a and this will be
my B and this will be my C okay so you
think you would think it will look awful
I mean something in some sense it will
but but then I will explain another way
to get that same expression in a much
more in a kind of a much more conceptual
way so to speak okay
so that and this will at least for me
this and I hope for you this will be
mystified this expression and this
actually in this result okay so let let
me put this into this formula and I
really want to do it it will in real
time instead of showing you showing it
to you already written before because
you know if I show you you will be like
okay whatever you know this is some
derivative so he says it works and it
works but I want you to really follow me
and to really see how it works so VR dy
- oh please
- track of what I'm writing because as
you see I can make I can make mistakes
so but now I want to do one more thing
actually to simplify to kind of
accelerate it slightly at the end of the
day I'm going to integrate this right
I'm going to integrate this I'm not just
taking this expression I'm actually
integrating that and I'm integrating it
with respect to dudv right so let me
actually then multiply this by dudv but
if I do that then this becomes a dy DZ
right
because remember let me put a crack me
right here right when we won we did
double integrals this was the formula
which we use if we integrate well the
way we did it was for X Y we did it for
GX t1 but the same would apply if I
apply if I do it for X V or Y or Y Z
right in other words when we integrate a
function in X and y we said it can be
written as an integral over U and V but
you have to insert this fact that I'm
sorry I the signal doesn't look right
okay what I mean is of course this right
so the way we wrote it is we said that
when you have a double integral of some
function f this is the code fool but I'm
what I'm doing is just stripping it of
the integral and then you move this
function I'm just saying that this is
this is really the identity which we
used and we proved it right so what I'm
going to do that whenever I have this
ratio because I now multiply overall by
dudv I'm just going to replace this by
dy DZ and well replace this by the V DX
and now replace this by DX dy can I can
I do that are you you agree that this is
okay legitimate yeah okay so this was
the purpose I'm just trying to remind
you that this was the purpose of
introducing this recordings in first
place because we wanted to replace
things like DX dy by D u DV and we knew
that this was the price to pay
we had to insert this factor so might as
well replace this expression by this
expression and likewise for the
remaining two summits so this is the
formula I'm going to use and I'm going
to now take this formula and say that a
is that is ABC are those components
which I got from the curl so now
here's what's going to look like dy+
so be now DP g - g RG DQ DX minus DP dy
okay check that you that I didn't
shorthand you shortchange you so this is
the formula I just take each of the
three components QD c so the easy way to
check is that we will take the Y V Y Z
this should be GX EF this should be XY
XY and then it should be P R QP R Q okay
so this is what I get
so this is what this expression stands
for when I integrate this I have to take
this I have to I'm integrating this
expression this is the left-hand side
this is the left hand side more
precisely if I put now the double
integral over m this is the left-hand
side of stocks instruction and now I
want to write the right-hand side
and the right hand side of course we
know we've known for a while the right
hand side I recall the DR if DX I plus
dy J + VG K and so f FDR and I F which
PQ I should have said it but f is PQ R
but this is what I'd accuse you so f is
f SP I QJ + R K okay so f dot dr is of
course then just pdx qdy plus rdz
so the right hand side is the integral
over the boundary of m of pdx plus qdy
plus rdz which is actually familiar
expressions for line integrals right for
line integrals we've known this all
along that line integrals could be
written this way if we did it we did it
often in two variables and it would be
just pdx plus qdy for three variables
it's pdx plus qdy plus rdz so what we
are saying now or what Stokes and others
have taught us is that this integral
over the boundary is equal to that
integral over the surface okay
so how can we relate this to expressions
so there is actually a very simple way
which I already explained in the context
of greens theorem and this would involve
the notion of differential so remember
that remember the notion of remember the
notion of differential of a function
[Applause]
the notion of the potential the function
would like this if f is the function
then differential DF is DF DX X plus DF
dy dy plus DF VT right remember this
this is a differential and now I would
like to apply the same operation v2 to
this expression okay so now let's apply
so maybe I should've written this is the
right-hand side of stores so now what I
want to do is I want to apply D to pdx
plus qdy plus rdz what am I going to get
the rule is very simple just apply it to
the function which stands in front the
same way you would apply it here when
you can calculate the differential and
just multiply by whatever it remains for
example DX here so let's apply to the
first one what are we going to get we're
going to get let's apply it to this
right so let's take it means that I take
the differential of T let me do it
slowly so GPA DX 1 plus DQ dy plus VR
[Applause]
so what is V P what is V P P P is V P DX
DX plus DP dy dy plus DP DZ DZ right and
now I have to multiply this by DX so let
me just put it here so I have DF DX dy
DX right this is what the first term
will give me I just take the
differential TP and I multiply by DX so
there is always the DX but otherwise
it's exactly the terms that I get in the
differential is that's clear any
questions that's expression let me do
the second time DQ so it's going to be V
T DX DX plus sorry D D D D Q plus DQ dy
dy plus DQ D Z let me open the bracket
when I open the brackets I have to put
DV here here and here I have to DC's
action okay
you why right sorry I'm already jumping
to the net to the left line you why so
now the last line the RDX VF + ER dy we
leave some space for ER dy dy + vr VZ
let me open the bracket Z V okay now
we're almost there so first of all if
you have the same variable twice you
have to get rid of it I already
explained it once because if you have
two coordinates which are not
independent from each other they you
could not think of them as two new
coordinates in other words the area
which this of the parallelogram which
they span is zero so this has to go this
has to go and this has to go so I had
nine terms of which only six terms will
survive and I claim that these six terms
will be equal to this to the six terms
here okay so let's check that let's
start with XY DX dy
where do I have DX dy
I have DX dy here and I have DQ DX and I
have dy DX but remember as we discussed
before if you have dy DX the same as the
X dy but you have to put a minus sign so
you get minus DP dy DQ DX minus DP dy
voila
okay I hope the rest works as well as
I'll return to this issue of switching
and getting the sign in a minute but I
just want to convince you that as we get
the right formula okay next is dy DZ
so here is DZ dy here is dy DZ g RG y DQ
D Z but we have to switch them here so
you get the minus sign which is correct
and finally DZ DX
oh I'm not underlying right on this one
DZ DX so this is DZ DX and this is the
gd-r gdaf2 get DP DZ and here you get
the mineral in the wrong order so you
have to put a minus sign minus the rdf
it works right so this very complicated
formula this very complicated formula
which I got by this very long and
tedious calculation is nothing but V of
pdx plus qdy plus rdz right this is what
it is and now I can rewrite Stokes
formula in a much nicer way
[Applause]
in a much nicer way by using this
saturation namely the left-hand side is
just pdx plus qdy plus rdz
over the boundary of m and the left-hand
side is the integral of V of this pdx
plus qdy plus rdz over m where the
differential D is understood in the way
I explained in the way I have explained
right so this this is what it boils down
to when certainly now it looks much more
beautiful there are no curls there are
no ad-hoc definitions of sources of
integrals and stuff like this you see a
very clear pattern let me call this
Omega and this is the integral of omega
over b of m and this is the integral
double integral of G Omega over N where
D now acquires very concrete meaning as
this as the saturation okay so this is
the general principle which I have been
invoking throughout this lectures and I
was writing to you that I will explain
that all the formulas that we are
studying in this in the course in this
part of this course can be thought of as
just special cases of the general
formula and now I can make it much more
precise in this particular case and you
can see that this is how it works okay
any questions about this yes
do we have to worry about simply
connected region at this moment no so
the simply connectedness shows up in
when we only the try to determine
whether a given vector field is
conservative right whether on the plane
it's very good given a vector field you
try to see whether it is conservative
and then you want to find the potential
function right so that moment we have to
worry about it but this issue of simply
connectedness it's sort of
one-dimensional lower it has to do
rather with fundamental theorem for line
integrals than Stokes theorem you see
because in that issue there was no it
was about pointing line integrals so you
know that this issue in short answer is
no we don't have to worry about any
orientable smooth orientable surface
right smooth orientable surface with the
boundary that's right yes so this is a
very powerful this is the power very
powerful equation now this derivation
that I have given you you know you're
not responsible for it in other words
it's not going to be an exam and so on I
just wanted to explain for you so you
can understand the more conceptual way
of of sort of viewing and appreciating
this formulas okay and I think it really
clarifies a great deal now going back to
going back to what we have to what you
have to know and which what you are
responsible for I want to give you an
example I want to give you an example of
the application of the Stokes formula
which is very similar to what you will
have on your on your homework for this
for this lecture okay
so example is actually it is actually
from the book at sixteen point eight
point eight so you are given the vector
field F which is e to the negative x I
plus e to the X J plus e to the Z K and
you suppose you're asked to evaluate
line integral of this integral of this
vector field over a triangle which is
given by this which is the part of the
plane
2x plus y plus 2z equals 2 which is
contained in the first octant which is
like for positive XYZ so what it looks
like is like this it here you have 1
here you have 2 and here you have 1 into
this triangle this is the triangle which
is a little triangle of intersection of
this plane this plane with with 3
coordinate planes you see because for
example you can put if you put Y and V
equal zero you get X equal one if you
put X Illume Z equals zero you get y
equal two and then Z equal one so this
is XYZ okay so you are supposed to
evaluate this integral which is fine
it's not it's not to complicate what you
need to do is you break it in ah you
have to say which orientation okay so I
have to be careful right so the notation
is counterclockwise okay so you can
evaluate by breaking into three pieces
by parameterizing each of this line
segments right and then just doing this
line integrals but it's going to take a
while because you have to do three
different integrals have to parametrize
so the
there's some work involved so what what
Stokes theorem does it gives you a
shortcut to this it allows you to
evaluate this integral in a much more
direct way because you realize that this
curve is actually the boundary of the
surface this will be our M and so by
using Stokes theorem you can actually
rewrite this as a it's an integral over
m of curl of F no DF so I'm not going to
use any of this fancy machinery I'm just
going to use straightforward the form of
the way it is written in the book curl F
dot d s so instead of doing this
integral we might as well do this
integral ok and in fact it is a very
good idea because curl f is not exactly
zero so that would be like the maybe the
first example for you would be to I
could write this in such a way that the
curl is zero right and then you actually
say okay so you don't have to calculate
anything right so in this particular
case it's not all it's almost zero there
is one component if I calculate this
correctly it is e to the x times key
right because this one you take the roof
to protect y&z here you take respect to
X and D so this is what gives you that
and here you take the result x and y so
that they disappear so it's almost zero
if it was here we just get zero right so
that's already that no matter how
complicated this curve is if the coral
vectors of zero you will actually get
zero so that's a wonderful application
of of this result where you can
calculate integral very quickly without
any doing any calculation here it's
almost zero so what we need to do is we
need to evaluate the surface integral of
this vector field okay so for this we
have to choose we have to use the
formula
and the formula is that in this case you
can say that this is a this plane is the
graph of a function you can write it as
V equals 1 minus X minus 1/2 Y let's
call this G of XY and then we know that
if you have a vector field E which is a
VC or maybe okay let's call it t QR
because I think this is the way I wrote
it before then the surface integral of e
dot DL in such a case is equal to double
integral over the base over the domain
in X&Y
where here you put P minus P DG DX minus
Q GG g y+ i right remember this formula
so in this case you only have P and Q
are zero so you only have R which is
equal to the e to the X and so you end
up with an R double integral of e to the
X DX dy over the triangle on the flank
which is the which is the the projection
of this triangle onto the XY plane so it
has x-coordinate 1 at this endpoint and
y coordinate to at this s and this is
your D ok so then this is very easy to
calculate so I'm actually out of time so
I stop here and we'll continue on
Thursday